feat(docs): add wonderlands standards (#21047)
AztecProtocol/aztec-packages: docs/docs-developers/docs/aztec-nr/standards.md

---
title: Aztec Contract Standards
sidebar_position: 10
tags: [aztec.nr, smart contracts, tokens, standards, defi]
description: Reference for Aztec Improvement Proposal (AIP) contract standards maintained by DeFi Wonderland, covering fungible tokens, NFTs, vaults, escrow, and proxy patterns.
---

> Aztec contract standards define shared interfaces and behaviors for common on-chain primitives. They serve the same role that ERC standards play on Ethereum: establishing conventions that allow contracts, wallets, and tooling to interoperate without prior coordination.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aztec contract standards define shared interfaces and behaviors for common onchain primitives. They serve the same role that ERC standards play on Ethereum: establishing conventions that allow contracts, wallets, and tooling to interoperate without prior coordination.
```

The standards described on this page are maintained by [DeFi Wonderland](https://github.com/defi-wonderland/aztec-standards) in the `aztec-standards` repository. Each standard is identified by an **Aztec Improvement Proposal (AIP)** number that mirrors its Ethereum counterpart where applicable (AIP-20 corresponds to ERC-20, AIP-721 to ERC-721, AIP-4626 to ERC-4626).

Because Aztec contracts have both private and public execution contexts, the standards are more involved than their Ethereum equivalents. Transfers can move value between private notes and public balances, and many operations require coordination between encrypted state and transparent state within a single transaction.

:::note

> The code examples on this page are taken from the [aztec-standards repository](https://github.com/defi-wonderland/aztec-standards) maintained by DeFi Wonderland. They may differ from the reference contract implementations shipped in this repository under `noir-projects/noir-contracts/contracts/`. When in doubt, consult the aztec-standards source for the canonical standard interfaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code examples on this page are taken from the [aztec-standards repository](https://github.com/defi-wonderland/aztec-standards) maintained by DeFi Wonderland. They will differ from the reference contract implementations shipped in the [aztec-packages repo](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages) under `noir-projects/noir-contracts/contracts/`. When in doubt, consult the aztec-standards source for the canonical standard interfaces.
```

### Storage layout

The token contract stores its name, symbol, and decimals as immutable public fields. Private balances are held in an `Owned<BalanceSet>` that restricts note access to the balance owner. Public balances use a simple `Map` keyed by address.

```rust
#[storage]
struct Storage<Context> {
    name: PublicImmutable<FieldCompressedString, Context>,
    symbol: PublicImmutable<FieldCompressedString, Context>,
    decimals: PublicImmutable<u8, Context>,
    private_balances: Owned<BalanceSet<Context>, Context>,
    total_supply: PublicMutable<u128, Context>,
    public_balances: Map<AztecAddress, PublicMutable<u128, Context>, Context>,
    minter: PublicImmutable<AztecAddress, Context>,
    upgrade_authority: PublicImmutable<AztecAddress, Context>,
    asset: PublicImmutable<AztecAddress, Context>,
    vault_offset: PublicImmutable<u128, Context>,
}
```

The `asset` and `vault_offset` fields exist to support the AIP-4626 vault pattern (described below). A standalone AIP-20 token that is not used as a vault underlying asset does not need to populate these fields.

### Note count constants

> In Aztec, every time a user receives private tokens a new encrypted note is added to their balance. Over time, a user's balance can be spread across dozens of small notes. A transfer must consume enough of these notes to cover the amount, but each note consumed adds gates to the zero-knowledge proof the user's device must generate. Without a bound, a single transfer could take minutes to prove. Two constants cap how many notes a single proof handles, keeping proving times practical:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Aztec, every time a user receives private tokens, a new encrypted note is added to their balance. Over time, a user's balance can be spread across dozens of small notes. A transfer must consume enough of these notes to cover the amount, but each note consumed adds computational overhead (gates) to the zero-knowledge proof the user's device must generate. Without a bound, a single transfer could take minutes to prove. Two constants cap how many notes a single proof handles, keeping proving times practical:
```

```rust
global INITIAL_TRANSFER_CALL_MAX_NOTES: u32 = 2;
global RECURSIVE_TRANSFER_CALL_MAX_NOTES: u32 = 8;
```

The initial call attempts to settle the transfer with at most two notes. If that is not enough to cover the amount, the contract recurses into itself and tries up to eight notes per recursive call.

> A sentinel address is used in partial-note flows to signal that a transfer destination is not yet known at the time the sender initiates the operation. This distinguishes "recipient not yet determined" from "recipient is the zero address," and allows off-chain indexers to detect partial-note flows in event logs without decrypting the note contents:

Reviewer: What is a sentinel address?

> A sentinel address is used in partial-note flows to signal that a transfer destination is not yet known at the time the sender initiates the operation. This distinguishes "recipient not yet determined" from "recipient is the zero address," and allows off-chain indexers to detect partial-note flows in event logs without decrypting the note contents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A sentinel address is used in partial-note flows to signal that a transfer destination is not yet known at the time the sender initiates the operation. This distinguishes "recipient not yet determined" from "recipient is the zero address," and allows off-chain indexers to detect partial-note (more info below) flows in event logs without decrypting the note contents:
```

```

### Partial-note transfers

One of the more distinctive features of AIP-20 is support for partial-note (or "commitment-based") transfers. In Aztec, private functions execute on the user's device before the transaction reaches the network, which means they cannot read public state (like a DEX order book or auction result). Partial notes solve this by splitting the operation: the sender privately locks funds into a commitment, and later a public function — which *can* read public state — completes the transfer to the correct recipient. This is what makes private DeFi composability possible.

Concretely, a sender locks funds in a note whose destination address is not yet known, and then a completer — typically a contract acting as a relayer or settlement layer — later fills in the recipient and finalizes the note.

The sender calls `initialize_transfer_commitment` to create the commitment:

```rust
#[external("private")]
fn initialize_transfer_commitment(to: AztecAddress, completer: AztecAddress) -> Field {
    let commitment = self.internal._initialize_transfer_commitment(to, completer);
    commitment.to_field()
}
```

> The returned `Field` is an opaque commitment that encodes the destination and completer. A separate call then subtracts the balance and completes the note:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The returned `Field` is an opaque commitment to the destination and completer. A separate call then subtracts the balance and completes the note:
```
It doesnt technically encode the destination and completer, it just commits to them right?
